Added parallel and batching test-writing pattern documentation. (#1020)
o3de/o3de.org: content/docs/user-guide/testing/parallel-pattern/_index.md

---

> description: ' Use parallel pattern to allow tests to be run in parallel. '

Author: Yeah that's fine.

title: Parallel Pattern & Batching Test-Writing
linktitle: Parallel tests
---

## How editor automated tests work

> **Open 3D Engine (O3DE)** uses [CTest](https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/manual/ctest.1.html) to drive all testing across the engine. Python is used for automating the testing of the engine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Open 3D Engine (O3DE)** uses [CTest](https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/manual/ctest.1.html) to drive all testing across the engine. Python is used for automating engine testing.
```

A Python automated test uses two Python interpreter instances:

* **External Python interpreter**: The test driver for the test suite. The external interpreter is responsible for launching the Editor and providing the tests to run to the embedded interpreter. This instance uses the [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/) framework and LyTestTools for specifying the tests. LyTestTools is a set of Python tools and utilities that have been written around pytest.
* **Embedded editor Python interpreter** : An interpreter instance inside the Editor with bindings to drive Editor activities and get feedback. This instance is responsible for performing the actual test and is part of the `EditorPythonBindings` Gem.

Upon test completion, the editor will be closed with an exit code depending on the result of the test (`0` for success and `0xF` for failure - other return codes will be set by the OS if the Editor crashed).

Both instances use the same Python executable found in `o3de/python/`. 

This is the basic flow of a Python test:
![Python Test Flow](/images/user-guide/testing/parallel-pattern/automated-editor-test.png)

> ## Test Structure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Test structure
```
H2 headings and above get title case.

Automated tests are composed of:

> * **Test Suite**:  A collection of tests, targeting a specific feature. Test classes must inherit from `EditorTestSuite`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Test suite**:  A collection of tests, targeting a specific feature. Test classes must inherit from `EditorTestSuite`.
```

```python
# This file will be used by the external Python interpreter to launch the Editor, specifying what test files will be run.

import pytest
from ly_test_tools import LAUNCHERS
from ly_test_tools.o3de.editor_test import EditorTestSuite, EditorSingleTest

> @pytest.mark.parametrize("launcher_platform", ['windows_editor']) # This test works on Windows editor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
@pytest.mark.parametrize("launcher_platform", ['windows_editor']) # This test works on Windows version of O3DE Editor
```

* **utils/** (Optional) - A `utils` directory provides utilities common to multiple tests for the `TestSuite` files. Utilities for specific tests should be part of their test files.
  
  {{ tip }}
For tools used across multiple suites, across features, or otherwise shared among the whole test infrastructure, place your utilities in the `Gem/PythonTests/EditorPythonTestTools/editor_test_tools/` directory of the `AutomatedTesting` project.
  {{/tip}}

* **tests/** - The `tests` directory contains the tests themselves that are run with the Editor's Python embedded interpreter. Test names must follow the pattern `<FeatureName>_<TestThatDoesSomething>.py format. Anything that is not supposed to be a test (like utilities) must follow `UpperCamelCase`, as in the following example.
  
  ![Tests Folder Structure](/images/user-guide/testing/parallel-pattern/tests-folder-structure.png)
  
  Subdirectories can be used to organize tests. These directories must follow `snake_case` format to be picked up by the `AutomatedTesting` project.  

## Writing a Test

> For writing editor automated tests, it is strongly recommended to use the **editor_test.py** utility in offered as part of the `LyTestTools`, located at `o3de/Tools/LyTestTools/ly_test_tools/o3de/editor_test.py`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For writing automated tests, it is strongly recommended to use the **editor_test.py** utility offered as part of `LyTestTools`, located at `o3de/Tools/LyTestTools/ly_test_tools/o3de/editor_test.py`.
```

        from .tests import MyFeature_EnterGameModeWorks as test_module

    # Another single test of another subfeature
    class MyFeature_DeletionWorks(EditorSingleTest):
        from .tests import MyFeature_DeletionWorks as test_module
```

The `EditorTestSuite` also provides configurable parameters for its tests. Override the appropriate method or variable in the test suite class:

```python
class TestAutomation(EditorTestSuite):
    # The tests in this suite must run with a renderer
    use_null_renderer = False # Note: Default is True

    class Lightning_PointLightIlluminatesMesh(EditorSingleTest):
        from .tests import Lightning_PointLightIlluminatesMesh as test_module
```

The following settings are available for `EditorTestSuite`:

| Setting | Description | Default |
|-|-|-|
| `global_extra_cmdline_args` | List of command-line arguments to use for all suite tests. | `["-BatchMode", "-autotest_mode"]` |
| `use_null_renderer` | Whether or not to use a null renderer for the tests. Null renderers are required on machines with no GPU. | `True` |
| `timeout_editor_shared_test` | Maximum time that one Editor can take to run multiple tests, in seconds. | `180` |

> | `get_number_parallel_editors()` | Overridable function that returns the maximum number of editors to run at the same time. | `lambda: 8` |

Author: It does return 8 by default. I'm removing the lambda text.

E           Report:
E           EXCEPTION raised:
E             Traceback (most recent call last):
E               File "<O3DE root>\automatedtesting\gem\pythontests\editorpythontesttools\editor_python_test_tools\utils.py", line 166, in start_test
E                 test_function()
E               File "<O3DE root>/AutomatedTesting/Gem/PythonTests/MyFeature/tests/MyFeature_EnterGameModeWorks.py", line 18, in MyFeature_EnterGameModeWorks
E                 assert False, "Testing failure of test"
E             AssertionError: Testing failure of test
E           Test result:  FAILURE
```

## Batch and parallelize tests

The tests which run in the Editor have support for **batched** and **parallel** tests. Batched tests are collections of tests which can run together in a single Editor, and parallel tests launch multiple editors. A test can be both part of a batch, and run in parallel.

### Batched tests

In batched mode, one single Editor is runs a batch of tests. Batching tests reduces the time taken to launch and close Editors to run tests.

![Batched Tests](/images/user-guide/testing/parallel-pattern/batched-tests.png)

### Parallel tests

> In parallel mode, multiple Editors launch at once to run one test each. The runner of the tests can set the maximum number of allowed Editors, where when one Editor closes if the maximum is reached, a new Editor is launched.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In parallel mode, multiple Editors launch at once to run one test each. You can set the maximum number of allowed editor instances.  If the maximum is reached, when an instance closes, a new O3DE Editor instance is launched.
```

![Parallel tests](/images/user-guide/testing/parallel-pattern/parallelization.png)

> ### Parallel Batched tests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Parallel batched tests
```

* `--editor-parallel`: Overrides the number of maximum editors run in parallel. Setting this option to `1` is equivalent to `--no-editor-parallel`.

## Best practices

* **Don’t create a level unless necessary**. Use an already existing empty level and don’t save the changes once the test is over.
* **Tests should be be self-contained**. No external tools should determine if the test has passed or failed. Instead, the Editor should do this work. Use the one of the Editor return codes as result of the test, `0x0` for success and `0xF` for failure.
* **Don’t read the Editor log file directly**. To read Editor log information else use the `DebugTraceBus` and `Tracer` utilities. The `DebugTraceBus` is able to capture any of these, without having to create an I/O dependency on a file.
    
    ```python
with Tracer() as section_tracer:
    # Do stuff

# section_tracer now contains all prints,errors and warnings that happened inside the block
if section_tracer.has_errors:
        assert False, "AZ_Errors happened during execution"
```

> * **Tests must be deterministic **. The application will run at different FPS and take different amounts of time time loading assets. When running the test make sure it is deterministic with these conditions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Tests must be deterministic**. The application will run at different framerates and take different amounts of time to load assets. Ensure tests are deterministic under these conditions.
```

> * **Wait on conditions instead of waiting for time.** Some tests require performing an action and waiting for completion. To optimize the amount of time your test runs, and avoiding false negatives caused by timeouts, wait on a condition instead of for an arbitrary time:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Wait on conditions instead of waiting for time.** Some tests require performing an action and waiting for completion. To optimize the amount of time your test runs, and avoid false negatives caused by timeouts, wait on a condition instead of a set time:
```

    ```python
### BAD ###
enable_gravity()
# Wait 5 seconds for the entity to fall
idle_wait(5.0)
if entity.position.y >= 0:
        assert False, "Entity didn't fall"

### GOOD ###
enable_gravity()
def has_fallen():
        return entity.position.y < 0
# Wait for the entity to fall, a maximum time of 5 seconds
# has_fallen() will be called in every frame as long it returns False
helper.wait_for_condition(has_fallen, 5.0)
if entity.position.y >= 0:
        assert False, "Entity didn't fall"
    ```
* **Compare values within ranges.** Using ranges for values rather than equality, especially for float values, makes tests more likely to succeed. Vector and other math constructs have utility functions for detecting values within a specific range.
    ```python
### BAD ###
if entity.position != azlmbr.math.Vector3(50.0, 50.0, 50.0):
        assert False, "Entity is not in correct position"

### GOOD ###
if not entity.position.IsClose(azlmbr.math.Vector3(50.0, 50.0, 50.0)):
        assert False, "Entity is not in correct position"
    ```

## Debugging tests

> During test development, it can be time-consuming to launch the Editor on a test-by-test basis. Instead, you can launch the Editor normally and then use the `pyRunFile` command from the Editor console:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During test development, it can be time-consuming to launch O3DE Editor on a test-by-test basis. Instead, you can launch O3DE Editor normally and then use the `pyRunFile` command from **Console**:
```

```cmd
pyRunFile ../../Gem/PythonTests/<MyFeature>/tests/<MyFeature>_<TestName>.py
```

> To attach a debugger to a running test, use one of the following utilities:you can use the following utilities:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To attach a debugger to a running test, use one of the following utilities:
```

> * **Wait for debugger**: Use the command-line argument `--wait-for-debugger` when launching an Editor to run the test. This argument pauses the Editor at the earliest moment of execution and resumes at the moment a debugger is attached. This behavior can also be controlled with the  `wait_for_debugger` variable in an Editor test specification, or forced by calling `general.wait_for_debugger()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Wait for debugger**: Use the command-line argument `--wait-for-debugger` when launching O3DE Editor to run a test. This argument pauses O3DE Editor at the earliest moment of execution and resumes the moment a debugger is attached. This behavior can also be controlled with the  `wait_for_debugger` variable in an editor test specification, or forced by calling `general.wait_for_debugger()`.
```

> * **Attach debugger**: Use the command-line argument `--attach-debugger` to force an immediate prompt to attach a debugger to a test. This behavior can also be controlled with the `attach_debugger` variable in an Editor test specification, or forced by calling `general.attach_debugger()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Attach debugger**: Use the command-line argument `--attach-debugger` to force an immediate prompt to attach a debugger to a test. This behavior can also be controlled with the `attach_debugger` variable in an editor test specification, or forced by calling `general.attach_debugger()`.
```

---
description: ' Use parallel pattern to allow tests to be run in parallel. '
title: Parallel Pattern & Batching Test-Writing
---

> 

Reviewer 2: I would suggest an introductory section that explains the difference of parallel/batching tests and why the user would want to use this

* **External Python interpreter**: The test driver for the test suite. It is responsible for launching the Editor and providing the tests to run to the embedded interpreter. This instance uses the [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/) framework and LyTestTools for specifying the tests. LyTestTools is a set of Python tools and utilities that have been written around pytest.
* **Embedded editor Python interpreter** (Hydra): This is an interpreter instance inside the Editor that is provided with bindings to interact with it. This instance is responsible for performing the actual test and is part of the EditorPythonBindings gem. These bindings are commonly known as Hydra.

Upon test completion, the editor will be closed with an exit code depending on the result of the test (0 for success and 0xF for failure - other return codes will be set by the OS if the editor crashed).

Both instances use the same Python executable found in *o3de/python/*

This is the basic flow of a Python test:
![Python Test Flow](images/user-guide/testing/parallel-pattern/automated-editor-test.png)

## Test Structure

Automated tests are composed of:

> * **Test Suite**:  A test suite is a list of tests that belong to a specific feature.

Reviewer 2: I think it would be good to point out that the "TestAutomation" test suite must inherit from the "EditorTestSuite" class

```python
    This file will be used by the external Python interpreter to launch the Editor, specifying what test files will be run.

    import pytest
    from ly_test_tools import LAUNCHERS
    from ly_test_tools.o3de.editor_test import EditorTestSuite, EditorSingleTest

>     @pytest.mark.SUITE_main # Marks the test suite to be run as MAIN

Reviewer 2: Should either clarify this is an O3DE suite or remove from example

    @pytest.mark.parametrize("launcher_platform", ['windows_editor']) # This test works on Windows editor
    @pytest.mark.parametrize("project", ["AutomatedTesting"]) # Use AutomatedTesting project
    class TestAutomation(EditorTestSuite):
        class Check_EnterGameMode_test(EditorSingleTest):
            from .tests import MyFeature_CheckEnterGameMode as test_module
```

> * **Individual test**: This is an actual Python test that the editor will run.

Reviewer 2: Same as above, should reference which class it inherits

```python
    from editor_python_test_tools.utils import Report

    def MyFeature_CheckEnterGameMode():
        # azlmbr contains everything that has been exposed to o3de Python bindings
        import azlmbr
        import azlmbr.legacy.general as general
        # 1) Open an empty level
        general.open_level_no_prompt("EmptyLevel")
        # 2) Enter game mode
        general.enter_game_mode()
        # 3) Execute a frame and then check that we entered into game mode successfully
        general.idle_wait_frames(1)
        assert general.is_in_game_mode(), "Couldn't enter into game mode"

    if __name__ == "__main__":
        Report.start_test(MyFeature_CheckEnterGameMode)
```

> * **CMakeLists.txt**: For adding a Python Test Suite into the CI pipeline, it must be registered with CTest via CMakeLists.txt.

Reviewer 2: Is there another document to link for registering via cmake?
